Hey, welcome back, so just before we start
diving into the animation controller I
want to clear up any confusion that we
may have about animation clips and
states and all that type of stuff so
what we're gonna do in this video is we're gonna
cover how animators, states and motion
clips relate to each other, we're
gonna be adding multiple animation
states and clips to a single character
we're gonna talk about the options for
transitioning between those animation
states but again please only animate one
character for now because a little bit
later on I'm going to show you why we
need to actually redo our clips slightly
so only animate this one character while we
get the fundamentals. So this is the
diagram that will either confuse you or
make everything very clear and hopefully
once I've gone through it it'll make it very
clear. Basically a GameObject has a
single animator an animator has one or
more animation states and then an
animation state has a single animation
clip, one or more transitions and one or
more parameters. So let's just work that
through for a minute let's look at that
in unity. So let's go into our lizard
animate... well start with the lizard actually
there's the lizard himself, the
GameObject. He has a single animator if
you try and add a second animator to that then you can't - you're not allowed duplicate components
right so here is the lizard animator,
it's basically down here this bottom bit
here, the animation controller
is this guy down here, right so that is
the animator or animation controller. The other
way to get to that is you click on his
lizard diagram, look it looks like a
flow chart, it is a dot controller, you double
click it opens up this so that is the
animator, or animation controller. Right,
now,
states. It has a single state at the
moment, it can have multiple states, there's
two ways you can add new animation states.
One way is to create state empty it won't
have any motion attached if you do that,
he won't have a motion clip if you do
that or you go to the lizard, into the
animation window and then create new clip. If
you create a clip it will create both a
new animation state down here
and it will add to that state a motion,
here's the motion, lizard appearing motion there
okay and that is the motion were
inspecting, the animation motion we're
expecting here, inspecting here; and that is an
animation clip also known as a motion
that's what that is. Let's take a look
back at the diagram, see if it's coming
clearer. So a game object has a single animator,
try and add a second component and you
get a problem. An animator can have one or more
animation states hence the diagram on the
end... the diamond on the end of the
arrow, so that is relating to this bit
multiple states in here . Let's add a new
state
empty. He's going to appear and the next
thing he's going to want to do is walk so
let's just call it walking. Don't really need to sa
lizard , because it's within the lizard
animator. Or animation controller. Has no
motion yet though, and in fact if you look in
the drop-down of motion clips here
there are none, so this list of motion
clips which relate to these motions that are
available here, we have lizard appearing, it's the
only motion we have available, and
they're all listed here.
Alright so that, what we've done so far
then is we have added a new animation
state in the middle there to the existing
animator, or animation controller and then
there is no clip on that animation
state yet,  but an animation state can only
have one clip, so of this lizard appearing
has a single motion clip - appearing - which
is the frames that we're going to actually play,
and then an animation state can have one
or more transitions and one or more
parameters, and then you can use the
parameters to help decide about your
transitions between states. What the hell
does that mean? Let's take a look, so I'm gonna
add a transition from lizard
appearing to lizard walking, like that,  and
then that transition at the moment the only
condition on which that transition can
happen is an exit time after certain
number of loops of the lizard appearing.
So if I run lizard appearing now it'd loop once and
go to walking. There is nothing in
walking, but that's what happens. if I
set exit time to two then it would go
once - well if I actually saved it would,
one second,
two, it would go once, twice round the lizard
animation loop then walking. So that's
the exit time parameter, if you want more
control for instance from scripts then
you add your own parameters like you
could say is attacking trigger is
attacking trigger and if you add that
parameter you can have multiple
parameters represented in my diagram by
this line here between animation states
and parameters at the bottom, you can have multiple
parameters and multiple transitions from
a given state, so I could have another
state here and I'll call it attacking
and he may for instance appear and then
immediately attack or he may go from
walking to attacking so this walking
state has now multiple transitions in it.
It can go from... sorry the lizard
appearing state has multiple transitions
he can go from appearing to walking ok he
has two arrows coming out of it, or he can go
from appearing to attacking. So again in
the diagram which you might find handy to
refer back to in the future, that's
represented by the fact that an
animation state along the middle line can
have one or more transitions. The final
dotted line transition conditions tells
us that another way of saying I want to
go from lizard appearing to attacking
is not an exit time but now I've got new
options, I have the transitions as
options - sorry the parameters as options for
the transition so is attacking trigger
we'll discuss what triggers and bools are
later it could be my exit condition.
Same here if I'm walking it could be that
if I set is attacking to true that it
goes down to attacking. So now from
script I'm gonna have access to this
thing called is attacking trigger if I
set it and whether he's walking or still
appearing he will go into attacking. That
may not be exactly what we want, it may be
that we want to finish appearing and at
least start walking before he starts
attacking so we get rid of that arrow in
that case you just go to bed transition
and delete
Don't worry about layers in the animations for
now, we got plenty to think about so far
with just transitioning between states.
OK, fantastic so then how do we get the
walking motion clip in? Well, you could
come here and say create new clip but if
you do that look what happens it will
create a new clip - let's just test it,
test clip and it's all very well but it's also
creating a new state, well we've just gone to
the effort of setting up these states
s you don't need to do it that way, you
can get rid of this animations state, ok
we can go back to our project animations
and you can actually write in here get
rid of that test clip, that test motion clip,
because what happened is the animator, when
you said create new clip it created both
a animation clip i.e. the frames, and a
animation state so it can be a shortcut
if you start there but if you haven't
started there and you've already got a walking state with
no motion clip attached this is how you
make a motion clip this is the time that
you do create an animation. It's confusing
because over in the lizard you could add
an animation to the lizard but we don't
add animations directly anymore because
that's being phased out we do everything
through the much more versatile and
powerful animator. In fact the hint is
almost in these icons, there's a little red
play icon representing the animation or
the motion clip inside the animator,
it's kind of saying the animator is a
bigger thing it has more context it's
more powerful so remember we always use
an animator... animation.... whoops... so
remember we always use an animator as
a component but over here in the assets
we can create a new animation cos this
lizard appearing is an animation so
create animation; you can call it lizard walking
and we might in future choose to put all
of our lizard things into a single
folder so we don't have to keep prefixing them
with with appearing walking so we could
just say lizard... without the lizard we could
just say walking; like that, you may even
want to put an underscore in front of your
controller so it sits at the front and then you
could put all of this in a folder once
we've got other animals. Anyway the
walking clip, what do we do about the
walking clip? So, here we don't have the
walking clip available at the moment, where do
we add it? You go to the animator, to
walking and then now you'll have, if you go to your
assets, a new walking clip. So you've gone
to your animator, down to the state you
want to the, to the motion section in the
inspector and you select your new clip.
Great, now you're gonna switch over to
walking. Fantastic, finally we are ready
to drag and drop our sprites in there. So
I don't have any sprites yet, what is a
sprite sheet? It's just an image, so I'm going
to store it in a folder called images, I'm
gonna go get my walking animation right
now from my Glitch PNG folder. So to the top
of the folder, looking for the deimaginatior which we're
just simply gonna call a lizard, walk
there he, is that's the sprite sheet and
pop it in, now these sprite sheets are very what we
call loosely packed, there's a massive gap
between these lizards and that's fine for now
but you'll see in a bit
that that will cause us actually in the long
term a bit of a problem.
OK, let's assume that this sheet uses the
same size sprites, I'm going to look at
the sprite editor of my previous guy and
see what size these elements are rather
than calculating it again.
251 x 186, yep I seem to remember that. So set it
to multiple, gonna set the same pixels per
world unit 133 point and just enough
threes on the end to avoid rounding errors,
apply, sprite editor maximize it so it
doesn't confuse you with what's on the
screen it's a grid, 251 by 186 I keep -
I get so concerned I'm gonna mis-
remember that. OK, it seems to be right, you
can tell it's right because they kind
of all the boxes fit.
Great, now if we  maximize this guy out there it is... a
lot of white space on it, lot's of
wasted pixels which means lots of wasted
video memory but we're not going to worry about
that while we're getting to know the ropes
fantastic, let's drop all the states on
there again, choose the same number of
samples per second as the other clip so
30 for the other one, let's choose 30 for this one and now we have a walking clip, let's take a look at
have the state machine up on the
screen and the scene view and let's just
play you see he's only doing one load of
walking and then walking is actually
stopping; so let's just take it take a
look at walking. What's up with walking?
Walking looks okay, now let's look at the
difference between these two; walking
attacking walking. No that's all ok, so
the difference is probably gonna be if
we go to the animations because of the
way we created it appearing has a loop
time here and walking does not loop so just
make walking loop as well alright. so
now when you play yeah that's right so
it does appearing once they walking
walking walking fantastic so hopefully that's given
you lots of different ways of doing it,
now I'm gonna add the third state which
is going to be attacking but I'm
actually gonna use this talking animation
because it's the best I've got, and I'm
gonna show you very briefly that there's a
problem and then we will solve the
problem in the next video, alright? So
attacking, I'm going to use walking, let's
just go through this quickly as we've
just done it. Let's create a new animation
let's call it attacking ok, I'm gonna go
to my sprite sheets gonna go and find
this talk one. Now, I just noticed that this
the size of this image in my case i s
3765 by 1116, the bit that's important is 3765, it's
quite big, right. It doesn't matter let's
assume we don't know and we don't care for
the moment, just bring him in, so there he
goes into images and
same sort of thing. Now this is getting
really confusing isn't it so I'm gonna
start calling these things appear and
then talk and then walk just so they're easy to
see, now that won't change the name of the
sprites themselves, these guys will
continue to have the same name as when
we unpacked them, I probably wouldn't bother to
rename the actual sprites, I don't think
it's worth it, though sometimes it's nice to
have a link back to the original image
so we can remember when we got and find it again
but now these really aren't looking
like images any more, they're sprite sheets
they've been unpacked. I think that they
would be better now in the animations
folder and then actually specifically in
the lizard subfolder which we're gonna create
now because all of this stuff relates to
the lizard right? So we have the lizard
animation controller, I've put an underscore
to put it at the front, and then we have
all this other stuff, and actually if we keep the names
right - appear and appearing - appearing,
appearing, attacking; now you see the
discrepancy? Attacking walk and walking - let's
just give them all the same name. Now
it sits really nicely, there's his controller,
there's the motion which is basically just
the - all of these frames packed into a
motion, same with attacking, and the
final one is walking. Now what we need to
do with attacking is unpack this sprite
sheet, look it's only a single sprite. You got
the right pixels per unit now, multiple
sprite editor, same deal just gonna unpack it, do
the same with your sprite. Now I'm just
gonna check
all three of my sprite sheets have the
same pixels per unit, they do that's
absolutely fine
fantastic so that's looking really good.
So attacking, it needs to know it's
frames so you go to the animator again
attacking you tell it what the motion is
going to be, it's the attacking motion. OK now
if we go down to attacking we need to
give it the frames, give the animator the
frames, lots of frames for attacking tons
and tons of frames select them all, drop them
on there, set the same frame rate.
Fantastic collapse down if you like for
tidiness and let's try. Keeping up
the animator there so you can see now...
what's happening is walking is just
looping again and again and again and
we're never getting into attacking
because the transition criteria for
attacking is is attacking trigger and
that's never happening. So what we're
going to do, I'm just going to set exit time,
I'm gonna walk for 5 cycles and then
attack, so appear once, walk five
attack. Sounds like one of those robots
are used to program as a kid. What the
hell's happening there? Look at him
attacking, fuzzy as hell and then he
splits up into two, weird. Why the hell's he so
fuzzy? That's going to be the topic of
the next video for you.